title: geekgate
author: buddhamagnet
date: 03/16/2011

A few weeks ago I attended an inpromptu meetup at All Bar One in London, ostensibly to talk about mobile. I mainly went to see
friends, but something happened that put all my thoughts about the surging appropriation of geek culture that appears to be coming to
a head, reaching its peak at the recent South By Southwest festival in Austin Texas. I was about to leave when a girl approached me,
noticed I was wearing a T-shirt that said 'Ruby makes me happy', asked whether I was a Ruby programmer and when I said yes responded as
if I had told her I was a globe-trotting rock star. Great for a geek, you'd imagine, but there was something else happening here.

I attended South By Southwest in 2009 and it was a blast. Taken with a pinch of salt. But even back then I noticed the queues for 
parties, full of liggers and hangers-on. The scent of celebrity and the feeling that the spotlight of media frenzy generally reserved 
for the music and movie industries was pointing squarely at the temple of geek and bathing it in false light. 

The rise of social media and the proliferation of applications and technologies around it, forging new bridges between historically 
isolated domains is part of this process. And, as corporations and business entities twig and smell the dollar, the appropriation 
process has begun in earnest.

Of course, this is nothing new. It happened to music and film, branches of politics seem more akin to aspects of the entertainment 
industry these days. Orwell understood this phenomenon. The ability to distract, to saturate, to manipulate media is essential to
the control of information, and geek culture may be the last great subculture to be sucked dry and recycled. After all, more than music 
and film, tech infiltrates almost every aspect of modern culture. 

These are just some initial thoughts, but check the streams and you'll see that the alpha geeks, motivated by far more than money and 
fame, no matter how enticing those ephemeral trinkets may be, are nervous. In the wake of recent missives coming out of Twitter HQ, 
they are looking at decentralised alernatives such as identi.ca, diaspora and building their own distributed communities.

There's nothing wrong with making money. But hyperbole and bubblethink are symptoms of disease. In the early days of social media, we 
worried that our tight and cosy communities of early adopters and media mavens was in danger of being trapped inside an echo chamber, 
rampant with insularity and exclusivity. Now everyone wants a piece, and if we're not careful we will see that echo chamber writ large, 
a vast ecosystem of showbiz self-aggrandisement and self-promotion.

The avant garde remains. In bedrooms and squats, loose collectives and ethical hackers. But now, more than ever, the traditional hacker 
attributes of irreverance and radical creativity must be accompanied by a social ethic and political awareness. The things we do have 
an impact in the real world - and it's up to us what direction that turbulence takes. 

